Dear listeners, I regularly talk to my mother about software freedom and general misunderstandings
in this area, and this is why we had the idea for this podcast.
We thought about the title and the implications it might have long and hard.
To be clear, we do not believe that mothers or women need an explanation on technical
topics more than fathers or men in general.
For people who do not want to identify with any of those changes.
But we wanted to talk about something real and not something invented just for the podcast.
That's why we decided to do the podcast this way for all of you out there who sometimes
struggle to explain their parents who are not that deep into technology what software
freedom is.
Welcome to the Software Freedom Podcast.
This podcast is presented to you by the Free Software Foundation Europe, where a charity
that empowers users to control technology.
I'm Matthias Kirschner, the president of the Free Software Foundation Europe, and I'm
doing this podcast together with my colleague, Bernie Merring.
Hello, Bernie.
Hello, Matthias.
Today, we are doing a special episode.
We are doing an episode about how to tell my mother that free software can cost money.
This idea came through our conversation because I regularly explain my mother, my passion
about free software, and also talk to her about some calm misunderstandings.
So we decided to do a special podcast episode for everyone out there explaining their parents
how free software works.
And that's what we will do.
The first question was can free software cost money?
How would you explain that free software can cost money?
Hmm, difficult because I mean for myself, the situation was a little bit different.
As when I started with free software was in the late 1990s and early 2000s then, I had
to pay money to get free software.
Like I paid money to get some KnolLinux CDs or DVDs and floppies and I pulled some money
with friends and we bought them and then we either gave them around so that one of us can
do the update, the other one can then do the update or when I had then a CD burner, I
could then use that to duplicate the CD images.
So we didn't have to wait till one of us was finished with it or if someone had to reinstall
it again.
So I think my mother, she saw very early that I had the need for money to get those CDs
as we didn't have like fast internet connection at the time and so yeah, but if we go back
and think about like how would I explain the topic now, I always first explain like
what is free software.
So yes, free software costs money and second, what is it that defines free software and
then I always, I would explain like that free software gives you the right to use, study,
share and improve the software and all of that has nothing to do with the costs.
So it's just, it's important that the software enables you to use the software for any purpose
that everybody, your mother, your father, other friends, colleagues and so on that they
can use it for whatever they want to, second, that they can study how the software works.
So if they want to, they could understand that a lot of people from you talk, they might
not be interested in that, but they also benefit from other people looking into this.
So friends of them who are more into technology, they would like to find out something they
can better help others and explain them how technology works.
Then that the, that you can share the software with others.
So if, for example, you got some Knolynux city that you can pass it on to your mother without
having to consider anything else about that.
So you can just do that and that you can also make changes to the software and improve
the software and adopt it to the need of whoever wants to use the software.
So if your mother would like to have something different, you might be able to help her and
make some small modifications to the software so she's able to do that.
If it's a company, that's a bit more you have to do to make, to Feed to their needs maybe.
So yeah, but, but that's something which is always possible for the software.
So it's use, study, share and improve.
And none of that is restricting if you can or if you should pay for the software.
This was a really good answer.
I did it a bit different.
I just explained that you could also donate money for a free software and there are loads
of projects out there which do need to help from people using the software and then I also
went to the improved part.
I explained to her, do you want to have a special feature?
And this would be only for you.
You could also pay somebody else to implement it.
Yeah, so yeah, I mean, I, I rather preferred when I, when I explained it to others to talk
about voluntary payment.
If, if you don't have to pay for it, because you, you get quite a lot in return for it.
You, you get, you get a software for it.
It's not just that you donate money and they do something for someone else with it, but
you benefit from it.
And so, so I, I mean, the FSFE from the beginning, when we were founded in 2001, we encouraged
people to pay for free software.
Because we believe that it's important for the further development of free software and
we think it's also for, for each individual out there, it's important that they give money
to those who value their freedom and less money to those programmers who write software
which restricts their freedom.
So it's, whenever you have the possibility to pay for free software and you have the
money to do so, we encourage people to actually pay.
There are some, some other possibilities, like I mean, sometimes we get, we get questions
like, oh, here in this, for example, in, in this app market, you have to pay for the
software.
So this cannot be free software.
Well, that's, that's not the case.
There is free software in app stores and you, you have to pay to download it.
There are also other ways to somehow get the software, compile it yourself, put it on,
on your, on your mobile.
But actually, it's a very easy way for you to support the further development that you
can also benefit from free software in the future.
So I would always encourage people to, to pay for free software if it's somehow possible.
Also for, like, my, for, for parents, it's, it's important to, to understand that, I mean,
when, when I talk about that with my parents or with friends and relatives, I don't want
them to have the impression that I am, I am working for software which everybody can
just use free, of course, that's not, that's not what, what, what I'm working for.
I'm working for software which, which respects the user's freedom, which is important for
our society, which helps us to, to have a more just society in which I want to live
in and not society where everybody gets everything for, yeah, great is.
So that's why I make this point very often in conversations.
As we now have talked about paying for free software, how do I pay the money for free software?
So I mean, there, there are different ways.
So in general, it's, it's not different than, uh, than with proprietary software.
The only difference is that with free software, you don't pay for a license.
But all the other means are the same.
So for example, uh, you can pay for, for the medium, like, I did, uh, when, when I was,
when, when I started with a software that you, yeah, that you, you buy the CDs, you go,
uh, you either buy them online, uh, order them somewhere or, uh, you go to a book shop.
That was also possible and you buy a box with, uh, with a book with the documentation and
then some kind of Linux CDs and floppies.
So, uh, that's something you can do.
Like you could also go out and do the same with proprietary software, just that the software
is then not respecting, uh, your freedom, uh, and with free software, you get the whole
package and you are able to, you study, share and improve everything which is in this box.
So the, the other possibility is that, for example, when you are using a mobile phone, uh,
and you, you go to the, to the, uh, to the software where you install your, your apps, several
of them, they have the possibility to also pay for the software there.
So you pay before installation.
That's, uh, that's true for, for proprietary app, um, app stores where you then can, can
just pay two euros, something or five euros, something and then you can easily install
the software on your, on your mobile and that's also, um, more and more possible with, uh,
free software, app markets, for example, eftroid, uh, they, they had some option in there
which enables you to donate and then now they are at the moment also improving this more
and more that you can have certain payment options to, uh, give back money to, to those
developing those apps. So that's one other part you, you pay before installation because I mean,
you could also somehow, uh, install the software on your mobile phone in another way where you
wouldn't have to pay for it, but you can do it more easily by, by paying for it and thereby
also supporting the software developers in the long run. Then there's the possibility that you
could give money, uh, to someone explaining the software to you like, uh, doing an educational
course, uh, so that you better understand the software, uh, they developed, raise your questions
there. I mean, you, you could go to seminar or an online seminar or an in-person seminar
and pay for this. That they explain you, for example, how to use game and in-scape, uh, for, uh,
improving your, your pictures or creating some graphics. That's something you can, you can do.
There is, uh, of course, and also in the commercial area, you can also, uh, send your employees to
one of those trainings. Then there are, uh, possibilities like that that you pay for, for the hardware,
which is then combined with the software and thereby you also support, uh, the development of
free software. For example, in the past, uh, I, I bought, uh, network attached storage. So one of
those boxes, which you can have at home and then make sure that, uh, the music is shared with your,
with your family again or the pictures you took from, from, uh, from family members is stored
there in a more secure way than if it's just on some USB drive. And, uh, you, you can buy some
out there, which are pre-installed with free software. And by doing that, you also support the
for the development there. Another one is that, uh, when you buy, uh, laptop, which is pre-installed
with, uh, with Linux or another free operating system, you're also supporting this. Or, uh, in the
past, I also bought, uh, like, and it was called the OpenMocco, which was one of the, uh, the first,
uh, free, free software phone out there. And thereby also supporting developers who are working in
this area. So when, when you buy a hard, uh, certain hardware, people might also benefit from that.
The, the other possibility then is that you, you buy certain services, which, uh, are run by the
developers of the software. So, uh, for example, you could also set up your own backup, backup
storage somewhere, install your own server and so on. But that's very complicated. And most likely,
I mean, my parents wouldn't do that. But I could encourage them to, to pay for a backup service,
from, from companies whom I know that they are also involved in free software development. And
they are then providers out there who are also heavily, uh, developing the tools you, you would
also else use to make your backups and encrypt that fashion. So that's one, one thing I, I always
encourage people to do. Um, you could also like, uh, now if, uh, if people want to, to use, uh, like
remote, um, video or audio solutions, uh, you could encourage them to buy this as a service from
someone who, who, who runs this for you and you can, and you can thereby support, uh, the
development of like Chitzi or a big blue button or, uh, or mumble as audio conference or, or
something like for, for remote meetings, you, you could get that from, from, uh, like open slides.
All of this, you, you can also install it on your own and you, you don't pay anyone for it.
But if, if you do and you, you pay someone for it, then they can, uh, they can also make a living
and further continue to, to develop a software which can then be used by everyone and under certain
circumstances, you don't want to buy this service from them and run it on their server, but you,
you would just like to run it in your own company and maybe also do that yourself. But still,
it might be good for you to, to give, uh, money to that, uh, to that company that they can further
develop it, which also brings us to the next, uh, to the next part. I mean, it's often something
which for, for private people is not so easy to do, but for companies, you can also buy, like, uh,
you can pay for support. Um, you, you just say, you give a certain amount of money to a company
and they make sure that the software runs at 24 hours a day, seven, seven days a week. Or, I mean,
in the case of, of your mother that she can, she can pay someone like you. And, uh, and whenever
she has a problem, she knows that, uh, you can come, you can help her and, uh, and by this, she's
then also supporting, uh, free software because you, you do some other work in this area and,
and can further help to improve the software and there. So there are, there are lots of possibilities.
Oh, yes. We conclude there are loads of ways to pay for free software. And what I also did is,
I encouraged my mother to look at the project website and check out which way they would like to get
some money. Yeah. So I mean, often, uh, for, for some smaller software, you often find that under,
like, uh, to make a donation that you, that you can do it that way. But yeah, if, if you have some
way of doing like subscriptions, uh, some, some of them offer subscriptions, um, some others, uh,
as I said, uh, when they are apps, you can, you can pay on the, in the app market for it. So,
also, if you, if you use, like, uh, if you use certain distributions, uh, where you then don't
have to pay in while you install, as you said, it's good to, to then, uh, encourage people to
think about, like, what is it worth? What I am getting here and how can I continue to support it?
And actually, one, one good way is nowadays also that a lot of Linux distributions, when you,
when you download them, you also have a way to, to pay for it. Like you often very voluntarily
payment that we have some slider where you can decide how much you want to, to give to, to them.
And for some of them, also, you can do a decided a little bit where the money should go, uh,
and how much of the money you give them should be distributed. So in the past,
I've also some community next distribution where you could join some, some club and have a membership
fee there. And by that supporting the further development. I think that's very important because
it's, it's, it's difficult to get good software for you as a private person.
If developers don't make money with private people and they share with private users and they
just make money with the, with the companies, then a lot of the software you as a private user
will get is more like, yeah, we developed that for, for companies. And yeah, you can also use it
as on your, on your private computer. As you know, I've mentioned the companies.
How would you explain that are actually companies out there that earn their money with free software?
I mean, very similar to what I just described. So, I mean, you, you have to, to develop software.
And then there are certain ways on how they are paid for that. So either with, with the services,
with, with education about the software, with making changes to the software because others want
to have something a little bit different than what they have or I mean, also the other part that
there isn't any software out there yet solving the problem for others. So someone asked the
company if they could do that. So, and those are always what, how, how companies can then make
money like with all the proprietary software out there as well. And then some companies they
decided that they want to follow an ethical model or that some of their offerings are following an
ethical model and that they do them as, as free software. I mean, that, that's probably also one,
one, one part you should, you should consider there that it's often very difficult to say that one
company is earning their money with free software because you should rather look at certain offerings
the companies are doing and there are some offerings where they make money with free software.
There are others where then they earn money with proprietary software and proprietary offerings.
So there are a few companies out there who are really 100% just making free software offers.
So that's that's something which which you always, which is it's better to to think about
what of those offerings that the companies are doing offering software instead of thinking like
which of the companies earn money just with free software. Do you have some examples of companies
that do have free software products? For the FSV we always try to to be neutral and not make
advertisement for for certain companies but the the things I mentioned at the beginning for
example from from the different from different software out there. There are companies who provide
services for that and with the backup solutions I said there are companies who develop those tools
and when you and who make money who make money with then providing services on the free software
they develop. So you say we should rather focus on the activity and not so much on our company itself
because there are loads of companies out there. Yes exactly. The important part is more the activity
and not the name of a company. Yes. So for example I would not like now to mention like there is
this company and this is a free software company but I would rather say there are companies which
are offering like take an example which is now very very interesting for a lot of people.
There are companies out there who offer you to to run the free software cheatsy on their servers
and when you when you buy this you're also contributing to developers and maintainers
of the software and thereby helping free software offering to continue to exist and to improve
and the same is then true for like if you stay with video conferences like big blue button then
or audio you have then mumble or there is then other software out there for doing other
remote activities. So basically there are many companies out there earning money with free software
sending services for free software or supporting free software in any other way but
there are also ways for individuals as we covered before but are there any other ways
of earning money with free software or to get funding for free software.
So yeah I mean there are there are some some public funds for this. So for example
the FSFE is also involved in some funds there where governments or other institutions
set up funds to pay or to support the development of free software. For example on the European level
there is the NGI zero and so next generation internet research and innovation actions where
there are two different programs where we as the FSFE are involved and you can you can apply there
and you can get funding and then we as FSFE also help you to make sure that your licenses are
compliant and that everything which comes out there is then really free software. So that's
something that you you can apply for funding like this. There's also another program where we are
in the advisory committee which is the NGI zero pointer program. So that's that's programs where
the European institutions set up money to support free software development and on national
basis for example in Germany I was several years in the in the jury of the prototype fund in
Germany where you can apply as an individual or team and then develop a free software prototypes
different areas and now this this program is also set up in in Switzerland and beside that
there are also other grants out there where you can get funding to develop free software but
that the ones I just mentioned they they have a strong focus on either it's it's mandatory that
you publish your outcome as free software afterwards or that's a very very strong criteria.
So do you think this would cover all the questions your parents would ever have about
the cost for free software and how to pay for it and how to earn money with it or do you think
there would be another question what would be a question that you parents would ask you.
Difficult I'm pretty sure there were there were other questions maybe our listeners can can help
us a little bit to remind us about some questions they received there. I think that a lot of the
questions I which which I talked about with with friends and family that that they were mainly covered
there then of course also some some other questions out there like how can you do very large
innovative steps when you would like to do it with free software how does that work and
some some other question about like competition with proprietary software and so on but I think that
that's all that's awesome questions which which would then merit more like to have to talk about
them in more depth so I think on the main level of friends and family conversations I think we
covered most of the things I encounter now. Some people have some questions they often encounter
yeah just send us an email to podcast at fsfe.org and we'll see if we can see that we we can talk
about that another time. Perfect so we will do another episode and talk about some deeper questions.
Thank you Matthias for giving me another perspective on how to answer those questions.
You're welcome. This was the software freedom podcast. If you like this episode please
recommend it to your friends and rated. Also subscribe to make sure you will get the next episode.
Thank you Bonnie. This podcast is presented to you by the Free Software Foundation
Europe where a charity that works in promoting software freedom. If you like our work please
consider supporting us with a donation. You find more information under fsfe.org/donate
and as we covered in this episode I would like to encourage you to also make payments to free
software contributors out there to make sure that they can continue to develop free software
which enables you to use study share and improve it for any purpose and thereby respecting your
freedom. Thank you very much. Bye. Bye.